---
layout: page
title: Axiom Space scholarship
description: A competition I entered in June 2021

---


In June 2021 I participated in an competition run by [Axiom Space](https://www.axiomspace.com/) - a company looking to create the world's first private space station. Space stations are positioned in _low earth orbit_, a result of this being that astronauts inside experience a microgravity environment (weightlessness). It turns out that this opens the door to a lot more science! Axiom already have some plans on to what to do aboard their new space station, but they were looking for more and asked students around the world to get thinking. <br>
I ended up proposing that we use the microgravity environment to rethink printed circuit boards and, to my suprise, [won the competition!](https://www.axiomspace.com/news/axiom-space-reveals-winners-of-inaugural-stars-scholarship-incubating-new-ideas-for-microgravity-research) along with two other teams. So, if you're interested in printed circuit boards and can afford 2 tickets to low-earth orbit, drop me and email and we can go and test this out :) <br>
The initial proposal did feature images (that's what S1,S2,S3... in the text below refer to). Those will have to wait until I figure out how to nicely insert images onto this page.

### The Submission ###


#### The Problem: What problem are you trying to solve? ####
3 billion people on the planet own a piece of metal and plastic that has 100,000 times the processing power of the systems that first put men on the moon AND can also serve as a camera, communications device, TV, speaker, calculator, torch, notepad, memory storage device, games console, alarm clock and more. It also fits snugly into their pocket. The modern smartphone is perhaps the epitome of multi-purpose, powerful technological devices and has revolutionized the human experience in more ways than one could count.
The printed circuit board, or PCB, is fundamental to enabling this immense and seemingly magical power of not just smartphones, but all of our technology today. It provides the mechanical and electrical support to seamlessly integrate the multiple electronic circuits that give a technological device all of its abilities. The more circuits and components on our PCB, the greater the number of functions (and performance) of the device. This then naturally leads one to ask the following question: How could PCBs be developed further, in order to equip our technology with even greater abilities and processing power?
This, I believe, is mainly dependent on PCB layer number and component density. S1 depicts the basic structure of a PCB and shows that they can be constructed from multiple stacked electronic circuits (separated by various insulating, grounding layers etc); evidently, raising the number of layers in a multi-layer PCB increases the number of circuits it can support. Furthermore, increasing the component density of a PCB (number of components per unit area) will also imbue it with a greater potential for the operation of more elaborate devices that will play a huge part in the continued development of human technology.
However, increasing PCB layer number/component density poses two serious issues here on Earth; a problem of heat, and a related problem of weight. When a device is operating, its PCB(s) experiences a high heat flux due to the ohmic heating in its wires, which serve to connect two components on the board. The consequences of such high heat loads range from individual component damage to the onset of naked flames on the board, which, as one might have guessed, permanently impairs board functions. Excess heating also contributes to board deformation known as bowing/twisting which if severe enough will render the board unusable. Similar deformation of the PCB also occurs if the board is too heavy, or materials are unevenly distributed across it. Furthermore, becoming increasingly popular is the flex-circuit (S2), made from a flexible conducting material as supposed to the rigid fiberglass-epoxy composite that common PCBs are made from. The flex circuit is even more susceptible to weight deformation than standard circuit boards.

We have seen above just how high heat flux and stresses due to board weight currently constrain PCB component number. Now let us turn to the question of how microgravity could lead to revolutionary advancements in the printed circuit board, and subsequently technology in general.



#### The Solution: How do you propose microgravity can be used to address this problem? ####
I propose that manufacture of printed circuit boards in a microgravity environment could greatly assist in solving both the heating and weight problem, leading to the ability to construct more complex and able technology.
Let us begin with the heating problem, as this is the more severe of the two. I referred to the heating problem as 'related' to the weight problem in the section above because removing all gravitational forces on the board allows for a huge increase in a wide range of PCB heat dissipation techniques, which are sparingly implemented on Earth due to weight and size constraints. Below I have listed some conventional methods of PCB heat dissipation:
- Large metal pads under hot components to rapidly conduct heat away from them.
- Filling vias (holes that connect layers on the board) with metal to aid heat transfer between different layers
- Embedding an increased number of cooling fans in the device, or altering board structure to place hot components in the path of a cooling fan
- Thicker copper wiring connecting components, reducing wire resistance (and therefore heating losses)
- Increasing the surface area of the board to allow for an increased rate of heat transfer

Each method above involves adding a high-density material (often copper for its high thermal conductivity) or increasing the number of components and subsequently the size of the PCB, solely to aid with cooling (none of the methods lead to increased functionalities/performance). Our issue is that solutions (on Earth) to the heat dissipation problem contribute to the weight problem and vice versa (reducing board weight leads to a higher likelihood of overheating).
Microgravity manufacture abolishes this compromise that we are forced to make. One can construct a board to his or her liking AND add sufficient heat dissipation methods without the worry of creating an ultra-heavy board that is likely to deform, as the concept of heaviness does not exist in space!
This has quite significant implications. Recalling that the PCB houses and integrates the many complex circuits, transistors, resistors and capacitors that all electronic devices require, if PCB layer number and component density are allowed to increase to heights unseen and irreproducible on earth, our creativity is the only boundary of the new technology that such developments could facilitate. In the next section I will discuss a cloud computing application to this idea, but here are some others.
- All machinery will benefit from being equipped with a more able motherboard (this is the main PCB in a device). Consider the numerous mechanical arms on the ISS; increasing its number of sensors/lights/transmitters requires more electronic circuits which will require a board capable of hosting and connecting all the circuits.
- More compact devices can be fashioned (due to higher component density), which are treasured in the medical industry (small devices have a lower chance of disrupting biological processes). One can imagine using the tightly packed microgravity manufactured PCBs in sensors to track the health conditions of astronauts working in LEO.


#### The Business: If your idea can serve as the basis for a business, how will it work? ####
Whilst the microgravity PCB will find its main uses in orbit (once the complex board is brought back to earth, gravitational forces will exert potentially deforming stresses on it), I believe that there is potential to provide services to and generate revenue from terrestrial customers.
There are two concepts that are fundamental to the following business application of the idea presented above. The first is the fact that more complex PCBs will allow computer systems that reside in space to achieve much higher performance than those on earth, and the second is that of cloud computing. The argument that PCBs with the potential to host more complex circuits (due to microgravity construction) will lead to more powerful computers is perhaps more fitting for the next section, so I will delay it until then  (but personally I'd recommend reading the next section before the following paragraph). However, for the time being, let us assume that this is true; we'll call these more powerful computers 'ultra-computers' for conciseness.

Consider then placing a satellite housing the 'ultra-computer' in geostationary orbit above a city. One can imagine the ultra-computer providing cloud computing services to those in the range of the satellite for a fraction of the cost of terrestrial services if the microgravity PCB leads to significant improvements in computing power. The prospect of this is very exciting; programs that are currently unfeasibly expensive to perform on current computers may find success when run on these ultra-computers. Examples of such programs are simulations of fluid turbulence, a field that has been described as the 'most important unsolved problem in classical physics' by Nobel Laureate Richard Feynmann and is hindering progress in the development of revolutionary devices such as those striving to provide commercial nuclear fusion energy. I imagine that companies and projects which are required to process large amounts of data (CERN processes one million gigabytes of data per day during normal operation), or which are training deep neural networks on large datasets will have great demand for the computing services provided by the satellite, and revenue could be generated through the sale of computing time in similar ways that cloud computing services operate today.
Finally, I want to discuss an indirect advantage to pursuing a microgravity-constructed PCB providing cloud computing. Current providers of cloud services are companies such as Amazon, Google and Microsoft; upon losing revenue to a rival providing cloud service of higher quality there will be an incentive to also establish a presence in orbit to potentially revolutionize their own cloud products. These firms are abundant in the financial resources required to make this happen and through industry agglomeration effects, once large companies have set up in orbit smaller ones should find it easier to follow suit. This could begin the commercialisation of orbit, a key step in the quest to make the human race a multi-planetary species.


#### How is Space an important ingredient for your idea? ####

The business application above relies on the fact that PCBs constructed in microgravity environments will be able to support more complex circuity, endowing us with more powerful computer systems. We'll examine this claim now.

Modern supercomputers are termed 'super' due to the fact that they employ a huge number (millions) of cores (processing units) working in parallel to execute programs (S3 depicts this parallel processing architecture). S4 shows 48 processors embedded on a PCB, which forms one of the many interconnected nodes that make up the SpiNNaker supercomputer at the University of Manchester; used to simulate neuron activity in the brain. Once again, a natural question to ask is to what limit we can push core density/number on the motherboards of computers, and this limit is one which we may only be able to probe once free from the shackles of terrestrial gravity. Previous discussions have highlighted the fact that in a microgravity environment a printed circuit board potentially could support a greater number of components whilst providing sufficient heat dissipation methods and remaining free from any gravitational induced stresses; implications of this are that a greater number of cores and transistors (which improve computer processing power), caches (which allow for increased speed of computation) and other components that benefit performance. could be housed on the computer motherboards, potentially leading to new 'ultra-computers' that cannot be matched by their terrestrial counterparts.*
There is further progress possible. The range of problems that supercomputers can solve is limited by how well individual cores and nodes can transfer information between each other (the problem may require that the input to one node is the output of the nodes surrounding it). A PCB with greater layer number has the ability to provide more complex electrical connection networks, thereby providing the cores/nodes with a higher degree of interconnectedness. This means that the ultra-computers could be significantly more adapted to tackling problems with a large amount of sequential processing (the opposite of parallel processing) to be done. This is shown in S5 and S6, where each rectangle is a processing core; a purple core indicates that direct information exchange can occur between it and the central blue one. A grey core cannot do this. Generally, a higher degree of connection between information processing components allows a machine to execute algorithms more efficiently, similar to that of the advantages of a deep neural network (many layers) compared to a 'shallow' one.

Hence manufacture and use of PCBs in microgravity will allow for the development of motherboards and other circuitry that could significantly increase computational ability, which could subsequently be sold in the form of cloud services to generate revenue. It is perhaps worth mentioning that abundant solar energy and high radiative losses due to the temperature difference between the station and the vacuum of space could assist with its powering and cooling, respectively.

*     Note that this assumes that other relevant hardware such as RAM and cooling systems can be delivered into orbit in sufficient quantities.